Rewrite descaling guide from scratch (#56)
Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/guide.encode.moe: encoding/descaling.md

# Descaling

Among the many tools available in an encoder's arsenal,
the ability to descale might arguably be one of the best.
But what does descaling actually mean?
In what way does it differ from normal downscaling?
How do you actually descale properly?
This guide will explain the groundwork for you
to start descaling effectively.

## Descaling vs. Downscaling

What the difference between downscaling and descaling is

> is a question that gets asked fairly frequently.

Reviewer: I don't think this fits here. Just explaining it directly works.

Simply put,
downscaling is the act of resizing an image

> to a smaller resolution than the original image,

Reviewer: I think we should have some mention of how downscaling uses the same kernels as upscaling, while de-scaling reverses the kernel's logic. We can reference the resampling page here as well.

Reviewer 2: > how downscaling uses the same kernels as upscaling

That's … a pretty general thing to say and doesn't exactly provide more information than what we have currently.

Reviewer: Hm... :thinking: I guess you're right, a more detailed explanation wouldn't belong here I guess but maybe a `## Descaling` section on the resampling page may be something to consider in the future (that better explains the difference mathematically).

while with descaling you are actively reversing the math
applied to an upscale,
reconstructing the original image before upscaling

> (which coincidentally also means you get a smaller image).

Reviewer: Probably unnecessary to write this.

Reviewer 2: Not entirely unnecessary, but the "coincidentally" is too strong. It was our intention all along to go back to the original information and reduce the amount of superficial information that needs to be included in an encode, or provide better such superficial information.

Actually, I'm missing this kind of explanation for the motivation of descaling. You say that it's better than downscaling, but never mention why we want to do it in the first place, particularly why it's **always** a good idea to do so (before applying your filter chain), provided it's possible.

Author: The reason for why you should descale gets mentioned in the next paragraph. I'll build onto that a bit further.

For a more thorough explanation on the intrinsics of descaling,
please refer to the [vapoursynth-descale Github page][vapoursynth-descale].

Descaling is generally the preferred method
of handling upscaled content whenever possible.
When performing a simple downscale,
information will be lost in the process.
A proper descale will, on the other hand,

> (theoretically) preserve all the *actual* detail in an image.

Reviewer: Explain here that `*actual*` means the detail that was in the image before it was upscaled. (Also maybe talk about how due to MPEG compression and blocking done *after* the upscale, some information is distorted or non-recoverable.)

Reviewer 2: Generally mentioning any processing done after the scaling, including compression artifacts, should be good. Blur is mentioned later, for example, but this advice can be general.

That said, if you can't perform a good descale,
you will usually end up with haloing/ringing artifacting,
as illustrated below:

> ![](images/descale/descale_ubw_00_bad.png)

Reviewer 2: Please add a caption to every image. I learded to appreciate this style in my academic work and would like to maintain it for this project as well.

Reviewer: I think since the graphs apply to the images usually directly above, the way it renders only the graph's caption and not one for the frame actually looks better on the website.

<div class="warning box"><p>
Only descale if you can be sure,
beyond reasonable doubt,
that you have figured out the correct resolution and kernel.

> </p></div>

Reviewer: I think we need to first explain how to get the correct resolution and kernel before including this warningbox, or at least start with a header that mentions this (fits better at the top of the next section IMO).

Reviewer 2: The warning serves the purpose of informing the reader to only apply what they have learned so far to certain cases and with certain parameters, i.e. when they have determined the correct kernel and resolution to properly revert the upscale. That information in itself is useful and important enough without knowing how to determine these.

[vapoursynth-descale]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/vapoursynth-descale

# Discerning the native resolution

> The first step to descaling is to figure out

Reviewer 2: I think we can put more emphasis on the importance of this, in accordance with the warning box earlier.

Author: I don't quite understand this comment. What are we supposed to put more emphasis on? That you need the correct resolution? Because I can't think of anything that puts more emphasis on it than writing an entire section on it.

Reviewer 2: I think it's just the "first step" wording that I don't like here, because it's not just the first but the most important one.

what the native resolution of a frame is.

> One way to do this is by descaling to a bunch of resolutions,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One way to do this is by descaling to all potential resolutions,
```

upscaling the descaled image with the same kernel,
and comparing the two.
The artifacts created by descaling to a wrong resolution
are generally more obvious than
the artifacts created by using the wrong kernel.
Luckily for us,
there's already a tool out there
you can use for this.

[getnative.py][getnative] is a common tool
used for figuring out the native resolution of an image.
It will return a graph showcasing all the resolutions

> it tried to descale to,

Reviewer 2: Needs a mention that it does this for a given kernel (and parameters), imo.

Author: With the default (bicubic 1/3 1/3) usually returning the correct resolution either way, I don't think it's necessarily worth pointing that out.

Reviewer: Maybe adding a footnote mentioning:

> With the default (bicubic 1/3 1/3) usually returning the correct resolution either way...

would satisfy this?

Reviewer 2: SGTM

> as well as a txt file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as well as a plaintext file
```

with all the relative errors listed.
Here's an example:

![](images/descale/descale_owari_01_frame.png)

> ![getnative.py -k bicubic -b 0 -c 1/2](images/descale/descale_owari_01_graph.png)

Reviewer 2: Please also add descriptive captions for these two. For the latter, do something like `The result of …`. I'm not going to repeat this for the cases below.

Author: I personally find that rather annoying to do when a lot of it is mostly repeats of the same thing and is already pretty evident just by reading the accompanying text. Maybe the first time around, but for others? Ehhh...

What you want to look out for are very clear spikes.
You can spot one of those here,
pointing towards a height of 720.
When trying to run getnative,
you ideally want to get a relatively bright frame
with very clearly defined lineart
and as little effects or filtering applied to it,

> like for example blur or glow.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it's enough to just say this or whether an example image would help.

Author: I think it is, but I'll add an example image and graph just in case.

> like for example blur or glow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using getnative,
the ideal frame to use is a relatively bright one
with clearly defined lineart
and no obvious effects or filtering applied to it
(blur or glow).
```
Doesn't grain also appy here as an "unwanted effect"?

If you've got a graph without any clear spikes,
it's usually a bad idea to try descaling that.
It's likely that you're either working with native 1080p content,
an already-descaled encode,
or a source that has been too warped to properly descale.

![](images/descale/descaled_fgo_op_encoded_frame.png)

![Running getnative on frame of a already-rescaled encode](images/descale/descaled_fgo_op_encoded_graph.png)

Also of note is that you should be careful
to not pick a frame with credits to run getscaler on.
Credits are usually added at the very end,
after the clip has already been upscaled.

> Those will need to be handled separately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't use getnative on a frame with credits or text.
Credits are usually added at the very end of the Blu-ray creation process,
after the clip has already been upscaled.
These will need to be handled separately.
```

Reviewer 2: Why should this be worthy of a warning box? It's about as important as choosing a frame without post-processing or letterboxing.

Author: I agree with Fichte here. It's already established before what kind of frames you should pick.

Reviewer: Updated suggestion with above feedback.

Author: They're not added at the end of the "Blu-ray creation process". They're added near the end of the _mastering_. I'll update it with that and push that alongside additional suggestions made on the new commit.

![](images/descale/descaled_yaiba_17_credits_frame.png)

![Credits and other native 1080p elements mess with the graph](images/descale/descaled_yaiba_17_credits_graph.png)

And last but not least,
we have letterboxing.

> Letterboxing is what we call the black bars surrounding the video.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Letterboxing in video used to be the result of transferring a film
shot in a widescreen aspect ratio to a standard modern video format,
while keeping the original aspect ratio.
This resulted in "black bars" above and beneath the frame.
Today, this is mostly a stylistic choice as letterboxing and windowboxing
(having black bars on all four sides)
is no longer necessary with digitally produced content.
```
Maybe we can put some of this in an infobox? Or a footnote?

Reviewer 2: Letterboxing is still necessary for non-standard aspect ratios not covered by disc formats, mostly Blu-ray nowadays. Although these hardly get produced for obvious reasons.

Author: The reason for letterboxing being a thing is also irrelevant for descaling. We're talking about preparing a frame to be descaled, not the history of letterboxing.

As an added bonus,

> this example is also from a blu-ray release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this example is also from a Blu-ray release
```

that was brutally post-processed,
making it impossible to descale.

![](images/descale/descale_paniponidash_op2_letterbox&qtec_frame.png)

![A murder scene](images/descale/descale_paniponidash_op2_letterbox&qtec_graph.png)

[getnative]: https://github.com/Infiziert90/getnative

# Filterchains

Once you've figured out the native resolution,
you can move on to the actual descaling.
There's two common ways to do this.
The first one is by using [descale][].

> The other is by using `invks` from [fmtc][].

Reviewer 2: Could use an ordered list here.

```suggestion
There's two common ways to do this:

1. Using the [descale][] plugin.
2. Using `invks` from the [fmtc][] plugin.

```

For convenience's sake,
we'll be keeping it to just `descale` for this guide.

There are a couple very common kernels
used in anime production:

> * Bilinear

Reviewer 2: Please add blank lines around lists, ordered or unordered.

* Bicubic b=1/3, c=1/3 (Mitchell-Netravali)
* Bicubic b=0, c=0.5 (Catmull-Rom)

Occasionally, although rare,
you may also run into the following kernels:
* Lanczos taps=3
* Lanczos taps=4
* Spline16
* Spline36
* Bicubic b=1, c=0 (B-Spline)
* Bicubic b=0, c=0 (Hermite)

> * Bicubic b=0, c=0 (Hermite)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Bicubic b=0, c=0 (Hermite)
```

> * Bicubic b=0.3782, c=0.3109 (Robidoux)

Reviewer 2: I've never heard of Robidoux, but I'm not an encoder. Are these actually used?

Author: They've ended up being the best results for some stuff I've come across.

* Bicubic b=0.2620, c=0.3690 (Robidoux Sharp)
* Bicubic b=0.6796, c=0.1602 (Robidoux Soft)

The most reliable way to discern
which kernel was used is by descaling the clip,
upscaling it again with the same kernel,
and then comparing it with the original frame.

> Here is an example script using `compare` from `lvsfunc`

Reviewer 2: Link for `lvsfunc`?

to easily compare frames from two clips:

```py
import lvsfunc as lvf

clip = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource(r"PATH/TO/VIDEO.m2ts")
clip = fvf.Depth(clip, 32) # Important to note: descale requires a GRAYS clip (or 444, but don't do that).

clip_y = core.std.ShufflePlanes(clip, 0, vs.GRAY)
descaled = core.descale.Debicubic(clip_y, width=1280, height=720, b=1/3, c=1/3)
reupscaled = core.resize.Bicubic(descaled, width=1920, height=1080, filter_param_a=1/3, filter_param_b=1/3)
merged = core.std.ShufflePlanes([reupscaled, clip], [0, 1, 2], vs.YUV)

comp = lvf.compare(clip, merged)
comp.set_output()

> ```

Reviewer: ```py
import descale

src = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource(r'/path/to/file.m2ts')

descaled = descale.Debicubic(src, width=1280, height=720, b=1/3, c=1/3)
reupscaled = core.resize.Bicubic(descaled, width=1920, height=1080, filter_param_a=1/3, filter_param_b=1/3)

core.std.Interleave(clips=[src.text.Text('src'), reupscaled.text.Text('scaled', 9)]).set_output()
```
Is there a reason here for changing the bitdepth? And using the python wrapper for descale you don't need to convert the clip or merge the planes back.

Author: Yup, my bad. These are examples of the plugin, not the wrapper. Will update.

The most reliable way to check for differences is
by zooming in 4x with Nearest Neighbor
and switching between the frames

> with the left and right arrow buttons.

Reviewer 2: Is this using vsedit? Should probably mention that, since yuuno has different means of comparing clips.

You can enable the zoom here:

![](images/descale/descale_zoom_a.png)

> Clip "No zoom" and select "Fixed ratio".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click "No zoom" and select "Fixed ratio".
```

You can set the zoom level next to it,
and the scaler used next to that.
Make sure to set it to Nearest!

Figuring out what to look out for
is a case of trial and error.
The best thing to keep an eye on
is lineart as well as small detail like stars.
It isn't uncommon for noise to become weaker after a rescale
(since that's usually added after upscaling, too),
so try not to be too distracted by that.

[descale]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/vapoursynth-descale
[fmtc]: https://forum.doom9.org/showthread.php?t=166504

# Re-scaling

A fairly common practice is

> to upscale the descaled clip to a standard resolution whenever possible

Reviewer 2: "whenever possible" is ambiguous. When is it possible? What could prevent one from resizing to a standard resolution?

(if it isn't already one, like for example 720p).

> There's a couple scalers that are generally recommended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following scalers are generally recommended for this task.
```

The most common scaler for re-scaling is [nnedi3_rpow2][].
It returns consistently good-looking lines
without damaging other detail.
Since it's an image doubler,

> it's important to remember that you'll have to scale it down afterwards.

Reviewer 2: No recommendation for a downscaling kernel?

Author: In the example code I use the internal scaler (which is Spline36), and it's also what I'd recommend either way. I'll note that Nnedi3_rpow2 (and resample) can downscale a clip inherently.

```py
from nnedi3_rpow2 import nnedi3_rpow2

upscaled = nnedi3_rpow2(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

Similarly, [nnedi3_resample][] is also used by some people
and might give better results
with some additional tweaking of the settings.
Like nnedi3_rpow2, it's an image doubler

> and needs to be downscaled after.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and needs to be downscaled afterwards.
```

```py
from nnedi3_resample import nnedi3_resample

upscaled = nnedi3_resample(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

Of course you can still opt for more generic scalers,
like Spline36 or Lanczos.

```py
upscaled = core.resize.Spline36(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

```py
upscaled = core.resize.Lanczos(descaled, width=1920, height=1080, filter_param_a=3)
```

A couple more extreme examples
would be using [waifu2x][] or [upscaled_sraa][]
to upscale it back to 1080p.
These are far more destructive
and take much longer,
but depending on your source,

> might yield overall better results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are far more destructive and expensive to compute
but might yield overall better results
depending on your source.
```

upscaled = core.resize.Spline36(upscaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

```py
import lvsfunc as lvf

upscaled = lvf.upscaled_sraa(descaled, h=1080)
```

[nnedi3_rpow2]: https://github.com/darealshinji/vapoursynth-plugins/blob/master/scripts/nnedi3_rpow2.py
[nnedi3_resample]: https://github.com/mawen1250/VapourSynth-script/blob/master/nnedi3_resample.py
[waifu2x]: https://github.com/HomeOfVapourSynthEvolution/VapourSynth-Waifu2x-caffe
[upscaled_sraa]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/lvsfunc/blob/d4bdfa76f9aa94a49bd038d98e8b28876ab7332c/lvsfunc.py#L515-L582

# Handling native 1080p content

When descaling,
it's important to be wary of native 1080p elements.
A common example of this is credits,
which are generally added after upscaling.
These will require being masked.
The easiest way to do this
is by using the re-upscaled clip
used for checking for the kernel
and using an expression to get the absolute difference between the two
and then tweaking the mask further to properly catch everything.
Then the mask is binarized
so it doesn't catch every small extra bit
it happened to catch.
This should work fine for most of the frame
(given that you descaled it correctly).

> Here is an example of that:

Reviewer 2: Not happy with this paragraph. It's a bit too unprecise imo and worded poorly. On one hand, you describe the steps required, but on the other you leave out important parts of the steps. Like, you say to "tweak" the mask (which at this point is just the difference between two clips) instead of expanding it.

```py
import vsutil
import kagefunc as kgf

clip_y = vsutil.get_y(clip)
descaled = core.descale.Debicubic(clip_y, 1550, 872, b=1/3, c=1/3)
upscaled = core.resize.Spline36(descaled, 1920, 1080, filter_param_a=1/3, filter_param_b=1/3)
credit_mask = core.std.Expr([clip_y, upscaled], 'x y - abs')
credit_mask = kgf.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Maximum, 4)
credit_mask = kgf.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Inflate, 2)
credit_mask = credit_mask.std.Binarize(0.05)

> rescaled = nnedi3_resample(descaled, 1920, 1080)

Reviewer 2: `nnedi3_resample` is undefined in this script.

Reviewer: Technically resolved this issue but there's another undefined thing, I'll make a separate suggestion.

merged = core.std.MaskedMerge(rescaled, planes[0], credit_mask)

merged = core.std.ShufflePlanes([merged, clip], [0, 1, 2], vs.YUV)
```

![](images/descale/descaled_symphoxv_credits_frame_non-masked.png)

![A mask to catch the credits in Symphogear XV's OP](images/descale/descaled_symphoxv_credits_mask.png)

> ![Merge the original credits with a re-upscaled frame (using nnedi3_resample)](images/descale/descaled_symphoxv_credits_frame_masked.png)

Reviewer 2: I don't see the image here, but is it a composition or the final frame? In the latter case, the caption can't use imperative.

Author: I don't quite get what you mean by this. Could you elaborate?

Reviewer: I think Fichte means the caption should sound more like `Original credits merged with a re-upscaled (nnedi3_resample) frame` instead of using a command-like phrase.

This can also be done when descaling
to a resolution that you plan to stick with.
Since the credits will still be messed up,
you will need to replace them with a downscaled clip.

```py
y, u, v = vsutil.split(clip)
descaled = core.descale.Debicubic(y, 1280, 720, b=0, c=1/2)
upscaled = core.resize.Bicubic(descaled, 1920, 1080, filter_param_a=0, filter_param_b=1/2)
downscaled = core.resize.Spline36(y, 1280, 720)
credit_mask = core.std.Expr([y, upscaled], 'x y - abs')
credit_mask = kgf.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Maximum, 6)
credit_mask = kgf.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Inflate, 2)
credit_mask = core.std.Binarize(credit_mask, 0.05)
credit_mask = core.resize.Spline36(credit_mask, 1280, 720)

y_scaled = core.std.MaskedMerge(descaled, downscaled, credit_mask)
u_scaled = core.resize.Bicubic(u, 1280, 720)
v_scaled = core.resize.Bicubic(v, 1280, 720)

merged = core.std.ShufflePlanes([y_scaled, u_scaled, v_scaled], [0, 0, 0], vs.YUV)
```

![](images/descale/descale_casefiles_ed_credits_frame_non-masked.png)

![Downscaled mask that catches all the credits](images/descale/descale_casefiles_ed_credits_mask.png)

> ![Merge downscaled credits with descaled clip](images/descale/descale_casefiles_ed_credits_frame_masked.png)

Reviewer 2: Same as above.

Also, maybe a slowpics link for these images would be useful?

# Descaling

Among the many tools available in an encoder's arsenal,
the ability to descale might arguably be one of the best.
But what does descaling actually mean?
In what way does it differ from normal downscaling?
How do you actually descale properly?
This guide will explain the groundwork for you
to start descaling effectively.

## Descaling vs. Downscaling

What the difference between downscaling and descaling is
is a question that gets asked fairly frequently.
Simply put,
downscaling is the act of resizing an image
to a smaller resolution than the original image,
while with descaling you are actively reversing the math
applied to an upscale,
reconstructing the original image before upscaling.

Descaling is generally the preferred method
of handling upscaled content whenever possible.
When performing a simple downscale,
information will be lost in the process.
A proper descale will, on the other hand,
(theoretically) preserve all the detail
that was actually there in the original image.

> This offers a multitude of advantages,
> like for example when dealing with artifacting
> that was a result of a poor upscale.
> You could instead undo the scaling
> and use a better scaler to upscale it instead,
> or keep it at its native resolution and
> have less artifacting to worry about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This offers many advantages,
one example being the ability to fix artifacting
that was a result of a poor upscale.
You could undo the scaling
and use a better scaler to upscale it instead,
or keep it at its native resolution and
have less artifacting to worry about.
```
Are there any other benefits worth mentioning?

For a more thorough explanation on the intrinsics of descaling,
please refer to the [vapoursynth-descale Github page][vapoursynth-descale].

That said, if you can't perform a good descale,
you will usually end up with haloing/ringing artifacting,
as illustrated below:

![Lineart messed up due to poor descaling](images/descale/descale_ubw_00_bad.png)

<div class="warning box"><p>
Only descale if you can be sure,
beyond reasonable doubt,
that you have figured out the correct resolution and kernel.
</p></div>

[vapoursynth-descale]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/vapoursynth-descale

# Discerning the native resolution

The first step to descaling is to figure out
what the native resolution of a frame is.
One way to do this is by descaling to all potential resolutions,
upscaling the descaled image with the same kernel,

> and comparing the two.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and comparing this result with the original.
```

The artifacts created by descaling to a wrong resolution
are generally more obvious than
the artifacts created by using the wrong kernel.
Luckily for us,
there's already a tool out there
you can use for this.

[getnative.py][getnative] is a common tool
used for figuring out the native resolution of an image.
It will return a graph showcasing all the resolutions
it tried to descale to,
as well as a plaintext file
with all the relative errors listed.
Here's an example:

![](images/descale/descale_owari_01_frame.png)

![Results from "getnative.py -k bicubic -b 0 -c 1/2"](images/descale/descale_owari_01_graph.png)

> What you want to look out for are very clear spikes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What you want to look out for are very clear downward spikes.
```
I've seen a few awful graphs in the #bot channel that have spikes somehow going up, and we'd want to avoid these afaict.

![](images/descale/descaled_yaiba_17_credits_frame.png)

![Credits and other native 1080p elements mess with the graph](images/descale/descaled_yaiba_17_credits_graph.png)

There is also letterboxing.
When talking about letterboxing,
we refer to the black bars
you occasionally find around a video.
Running these through getnative will result in very odd graphs
that you can't discern much from.

![](images/descale/descaled_crystar_op1_letterbox_frame.png)

![There's no way to figure out the native resolution from this](images/descale/descaled_crystar_op1_letterbox_graph.png)

And finally, we run into heavily post-processed videos.
These are usually impossible to accurately descale
due to additional post-processing that was applied during the scaling,
or due to the scaler used being so destructive
that it leaves no detail to preserve.

![](images/descale/descale_paniponidash_op2_qtec_frame.png)

![This is what a murder scene looks like](images/descale/descale_paniponidash_op2_qtec_graph.png)

[getnative]: https://github.com/Infiziert90/getnative

# Filterchains

Once you've figured out the native resolution,
you can move on to the actual descaling.

> There's two common ways to do this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's three common ways to do this.
```
Whoops, didn't notice that when I added mention of the python functions.

Reviewer 2: Should those even be separate entries?

1. Using the [descale][] plugin.
1. Using the [descale Python wrapper][descale.py] .
1. Using `invks` from the [fmtc][] plugin.

For convenience's sake,
we'll be keeping it to just `descale` for this guide.

There are a couple very common kernels
used in anime production:

* Bilinear
* Bicubic b=1/3, c=1/3 (Mitchell-Netravali)
* Bicubic b=0, c=0.5 (Catmull-Rom)

Occasionally, although rare,
you may also run into the following kernels:

* Lanczos taps=3
* Lanczos taps=4
* Spline16
* Spline36
* Bicubic b=1, c=0 (B-Spline)
* Bicubic b=0, c=1 (Sharp Bicubic)
* Bicubic b=0, c=0 (Hermite)
* Bicubic b=0.3782, c=0.3109 (Robidoux)
* Bicubic b=0.2620, c=0.3690 (Robidoux Sharp)
* Bicubic b=0.6796, c=0.1602 (Robidoux Soft)

The most reliable way to discern
which kernel was used is by descaling the clip,
upscaling it again with the same kernel,
and then comparing it with the original frame.
Here is an example script using `compare` and `test_descale` from [lvsfunc][]
to easily compare frames from two clips:

```py
import lvsfunc as lvf

clip = core.lsmas.LWLibavSource(r"PATH/TO/VIDEO.m2ts")

descaled = lvf.test_descale(clip, height=720, kernel='bicubic', b=1/3, c=1/3)

> comp = lvf.compare(clip, descaled)
> comp.set_output()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lvf.compare(clip, descaled).set_output()
```
I think chaining in this case is actually more elegant. Just an IMO suggestion, not a fix.

```

The most reliable way to check for differences in vsedit is
by zooming in 4x with Nearest Neighbor
and switching between the frames
with the left and right arrow buttons.
You can enable the zoom here:

![The zoom bar](images/descale/descale_zoom_a.png)

Click "No zoom" and select "Fixed ratio".
You can set the zoom level next to it,
and the scaler used next to that.
Make sure to set it to Nearest!

Figuring out what to look out for
is a case of trial and error.
The best thing to keep an eye on
is lineart as well as small detail like stars.
It isn't uncommon for noise to become weaker after a rescale
(since that's usually added after upscaling, too),
so try not to be too distracted by that.

[descale]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/vapoursynth-descale
[descale.py]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/vapoursynth-descale/blob/master/descale.py
[fmtc]: https://forum.doom9.org/showthread.php?t=166504
[lvsfunc]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/lvsfunc

# Re-scaling

A fairly common practice is
to upscale the descaled clip to a standard resolution
(if it isn't already one, like for example 720p).

> The following scalers are generally recommended for this task.

Reviewer: These seems like there's going to be a list after this line, so maybe needs some rewording.

The most common scaler for re-scaling is [nnedi3_rpow2][].
It returns consistently good-looking lines
without damaging other detail.
Since it's an image doubler,
it's important to remember that you'll have to scale it down afterwards.
Nnedi3_rpow2 can do this internally,
as demonstrated below:

```py
from nnedi3_rpow2 import nnedi3_rpow2

upscaled = nnedi3_rpow2(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

> Similarly, [nnedi3_resample][] is also used by some people

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another scaler, [nnedi3_resample][], is sometimes used
```

and might give better results
with some additional tweaking of the settings.
Like nnedi3_rpow2, it's an image doubler
and needs to be downscaled after.

```py
from nnedi3_resample import nnedi3_resample

upscaled = nnedi3_resample(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

Of course you can still opt for more generic scalers,
like Spline36 or Lanczos.

```py
upscaled = core.resize.Spline36(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```

```py
upscaled = core.resize.Lanczos(descaled, width=1920, height=1080, filter_param_a=3)
```

A couple more extreme examples
would be using [waifu2x][] or [upscaled_sraa][]

> to upscale it back to 1080p.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to upscale it back to the original resolution.
```

These are far more destructive and expensive to compute
but might yield overall better results
depending on your source.

```py
upscaled = core.caffe.Waifu2x(descaled, noise=-1, scale=2, model=6, cudnn=True)
upscaled = core.resize.Spline36(upscaled, width=1920, height=1080)
```
```py
import lvsfunc as lvf

upscaled = lvf.upscaled_sraa(descaled, h=1080)
```

[nnedi3_rpow2]: https://github.com/darealshinji/vapoursynth-plugins/blob/master/scripts/nnedi3_rpow2.py
[nnedi3_resample]: https://github.com/mawen1250/VapourSynth-script/blob/master/nnedi3_resample.py
[waifu2x]: https://github.com/HomeOfVapourSynthEvolution/VapourSynth-Waifu2x-caffe
[upscaled_sraa]: https://github.com/Irrational-Encoding-Wizardry/lvsfunc/blob/d4bdfa76f9aa94a49bd038d98e8b28876ab7332c/lvsfunc.py#L515-L582

# Handling native 1080p content

When descaling,
it's important to be wary of native 1080p elements.
A common example of this is credits,
which are usually added after upscaling.

> These will require being masked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These will need to be masked.
```

to make sure it catches all the credits properly.
This should work fine for most of the frame
(given that you descaled it correctly).
Here is an example of that:

```py
import vsutil
import kagefunc as kgf
import vsutil
from nnedi3_resample import nnedi3_resample

clip_y = vsutil.get_y(clip)
descaled = core.descale.Debicubic(clip_y, 1550, 872, b=1/3, c=1/3)
upscaled = core.resize.Spline36(descaled, 1920, 1080, filter_param_a=1/3, filter_param_b=1/3)
credit_mask = core.std.Expr([clip_y, upscaled], 'x y - abs')
credit_mask = vsutil.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Maximum, 4)
credit_mask = vsutil.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Inflate, 2)
credit_mask = nn3_rs.credit_mask.std.Binarize(0.05)

rescaled = nnedi3_resample(descaled, width=1920, height=1080)
merged = core.std.MaskedMerge(rescaled, planes[0], credit_mask)

merged = core.std.ShufflePlanes([merged, clip], [0, 1, 2], vs.YUV)
```

![](images/descale/descaled_symphoxv_credits_frame_non-masked.png)

![A mask to catch the credits in Symphogear XV's OP](images/descale/descaled_symphoxv_credits_mask.png)
![Merge the original credits with a re-upscaled frame](images/descale/descaled_symphoxv_credits_frame_masked.png)

> [Here][rescaled] is a link to a comparison.

Reviewer: I think that Fichte has said before not to have a link on words like "here" and instead just link the actual thing. i.e.:
```suggestion
[Slowpics comparison of the re-upscaled frame.][rescaled]
```

This can also be done when descaling
to a resolution that you plan to stick with.

> Since the credits will still be messed up,
> you will need to replace them with a downscaled clip.

Reviewer: The differentiation here is that you are going to *downscale* the credits while *descaling* the rest of the frame, right? I think better wording would be as follows:
```suggestion
Since there is no need to *descale* native 1080p elements,
you will need to *downscale* the credits instead.
```

```py
y, u, v = vsutil.split(clip)
descaled = core.descale.Debicubic(y, 1280, 720, b=0, c=1/2)
upscaled = core.resize.Bicubic(descaled, 1920, 1080, filter_param_a=0, filter_param_b=1/2)
downscaled = core.resize.Spline36(y, 1280, 720)
credit_mask = core.std.Expr([y, upscaled], 'x y - abs')
credit_mask = kgf.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Maximum, 6)
credit_mask = kgf.iterate(credit_mask, core.std.Inflate, 2)
credit_mask = core.std.Binarize(credit_mask, 0.05)
credit_mask = core.resize.Spline36(credit_mask, 1280, 720)

y_scaled = core.std.MaskedMerge(descaled, downscaled, credit_mask)
u_scaled = core.resize.Bicubic(u, 1280, 720)
v_scaled = core.resize.Bicubic(v, 1280, 720)

merged = core.std.ShufflePlanes([y_scaled, u_scaled, v_scaled], [0, 0, 0], vs.YUV)
```

![](images/descale/descale_casefiles_ed_credits_frame_non-masked.png)

![Downscaled mask that catches all the credits](images/descale/descale_casefiles_ed_credits_mask.png)

![Merge downscaled credits with descaled clip](images/descale/descale_casefiles_ed_credits_frame_masked.png)

> [Here][downscaled] is also a link to a comparison.

Reviewer: Same as previous one:
```suggestion
[Slowpics comparison of the descaled frame.][downscaled]
```
